docs for form-associated custom elements in Stencil (#1247)
ionic-team/stencil-site: docs/components/form-associated.md

---
title: Form-Associated Components
sidebar_label: Form-Associated Components
description: Form-Associated Stencil Components
slug: /form-associated
---

# Building Form-Associated Components in Stencil

> As of $VERSION Stencil has experimental support for form-associated custom

Reviewer: I feel _pretty confident_ this'll be 4.5.0. If that's not the case, that's fine -d just adding this comment so we don't forget.
```suggestion
As of 4.5.0 Stencil has experimental support for form-associated custom
```

Author: I'll misspell `VERSION` on purpose so we can't merge till we update

> As of $VERSION Stencil has experimental support for form-associated custom

Reviewer: Since we normally put experimental features behind flags, should we s/experimental/initial?
```suggestion
As of $VERSION Stencil has initial support for form-associated custom
```

Author: yeah, that might be something to discuss a little bit - I think we floated this being an 'experimental' feature but I don't know if we made a solid decision. The advantage of doing so I guess is that we can change APIs more freely if we run into some problems with them but I'm not sure what exactly makes the most sense

Reviewer 2: I was under the impression we were initially shipping this as experimental. The feature PR also states it as experimental

Author: yeah, it feels like we've landed on something that will work and that we'd only possibly add to later, i.e. adding some nicer API around validation or something like that (just spitballing not proposing haha). like what we have now feels very close to the spec and minimal, so I wouldn't anticipate we'd need to massively rework parts of it in the future and so an actual 'experimental' label wouldn't precisely be warranted

Author: To round this out, I think it makes sense to just say "external" here and to leave the `@Component` option and the decorator as-is for now

Reviewer: > To round this out, I think it makes sense to just say "external" here and to leave the @Component option and the decorator as-is for now

I think I'm lost, what parts 'external'?

Author: ohh `s/external/initial` 🤪

elements. This allows Stencil components to participate in a rich way in HTML
forms, integrating with native browser features for validation and
accessibility while maintaining encapsulation and control over their styling
and presentation.

:::caution
Browser support for the APIs that this feature depends on is still relatively
low ([~84% as of this writing](https://caniuse.com/?search=attachInternals))
and the Stencil team has no plans at present support or incorporate any

> polyfills for the browser functionality. Accordingly, this is a 'use at your
> own risk' feature: it is up to you as a developer to ensure the browsers you
> need to support have shipped the necessary APIs.

Reviewer: This reads a little too adversarial to me - I think we can soften this a little bit by removing the content that precedes the colon like so:
```suggestion
polyfills for the browser functionality. It is the responsibility of the developer to ensure the browsers you need to support have shipped the necessary APIs.
```

Reviewer: I'm also a little concerned about this figure (~84% as of this writing) changing over time/us not keeping it up to date. What're you're thoughts on something like:

> Browser support for the APIs that this feature depends are still evolving.
At this time, the Stencil team has no plans at present support or incorporate any
polyfills for the browser functionality. It is the responsibility of the developer to ensure the browsers you need to support have shipped the necessary APIs.

Author: Sure, although I think "as of this writing" indicates it's not going to be current forever - once it's higher (above what threshold I don't know) I guess the note should just go away entirely

:::

> ## Creating a form-associated component

Reviewer: Since this is a title, can we capital-case it?
```suggestion
## Creating a Form-Associated Component
```

> A form-associated Stencil component is one which sets the new `formAssociated`
> option in the argument to the `@Component`

Reviewer: Can we link this back to the `formAssociated` option on the component page?
```suggestion
A form-associated Stencil component is one which sets the new [`formAssociated`
option](./component.md#formAssociated) in the argument to the `@Component`
```

method on `HTMLElement` to associate your Stencil component with an ancestor
`<form>` element. During compilation, Stencil will generate code that calls
this method at an appropriate point in the component lifecycle for both
[lazy](../output-targets/dist.md) and [custom
elements](../output-targets/custom-elements.md) builds.
:::

A Stencil component using this API to implement a custom text input could look
like this:

```tsx title="src/components/custom-text-input.tsx"
import { Component, h, AttachInternals, State } from '@stencil/core';

@Component({
  tag: 'custom-text-input',
  shadow: true,
  formAssociated: true
})
export class CustomTextInput {
  @State() value: string;

  @AttachInternals() internals: ElementInternals;

  handleChange(event) {
    this.value = event.target.value;
    this.internals.setFormValue(event.target.value);
  }

  componentWillLoad() {
    this.internals.setFormValue("a default value");
  }

  render() {
    return (
      <input
        type="text"
        value={this.value}
        onInput={(event) => this.handleChange(event)}
      />
    )
  }
}
```

> This component doesn't do a whole lot as-is, but luckily a great deal more is

Reviewer: Can we walk folks through what it does do? We put the onus on readers here to understand what the code does, and learn a new concept - I think it could be beneficial to folks for us to explain what's occurring - similar to what we do in https://stencil-docs-git-ap-form-associated-ionic1.vercel.app/docs/next/getting-started#anatomy-of-my-component and tie it back to what's been described already.

Author: yeah I think that's a good idea, it's just one method call here but why not explain it. I added an explanation of how it works, one little quirk (reading the `"name"` attribute off of the host element) and links to some MDN articles

possible with the `ElementInternals` API, including [setting the element's
validity](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ElementInternals/setValidity),
reading the validity state of the form, reading other form values, and more.

> ### Resources

Reviewer: Should this be a child header of 'Creating a form-associated component', or should this stand as a sibling to it?
```suggestion
## Resources
```

Author: yea I think I wanted two `#` here

---
title: Form-Associated Components
sidebar_label: Form-Associated Components
description: Form-Associated Stencil Components
slug: /form-associated
---

# Building Form-Associated Components in Stencil

As of $VERISION Stencil has initial support for form-associated custom
elements. This allows Stencil components to participate in a rich way in HTML
forms, integrating with native browser features for validation and
accessibility while maintaining encapsulation and control over their styling
and presentation.

:::caution
Browser support for the APIs that this feature depends on is still not

> universal[^1] and the Stencil team has no plans at present support or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
universal[^1] and the Stencil team has no plans at present to support or
```

Author: 🤦‍♀️
